\" # Generate html (uses p9p)
\" # sed -n 's/\\" //p' 9vx.1 | 9 rc > 9vx.html
\" troff -manhtml 9vx.1 | troff2html | sed '
\" 	s/Plan 9 man page/Plan 9 VX man page/
\" 	s,9VX,<a href="http://bytebucket.org/yiyus/vx32/wiki/">&</a>,g
\" '
.TH 9VX 1
.SH NAME
9vx, 9vx-tap \- Plan9 port to the virtual execution environment vx32
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 9vx
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I -p 9vx.ini
]
[
.I -r localroot
]
[
.I -u user
]
[
.I -e initcmd
]
[
.I bootargs
]
.PP
.B 9vx-tap
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I -p 9vx.ini
]
[
.I -r localroot
]
[
.I -u user
]
[
.I -e initcmd
]
[
.I bootargs
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Plan 9 VX (or
.I 9vx
for short) is a port of the Plan 9 operating system to run on top of
commodity operating systems, allowing the use of both Plan 9 and the
host system simultaneously. To run user programs,
.I 9vx
creates an appropriate address space in a window within its own address
space and invokes vx32 to simulate user mode execution. Some hardware
devices are replaced by virtual versions, depending on the options
given to
.I 9vx.
.I 9vx-tap
is a shell script that sets up a tap device with tunctl(1), launches
.I 9vx,
and removes the tap device when finished.
.PP
Options can be passed to
.I 9vx
as command line arguments or in a configuration file specified with the
.I -p
option (see below). 
One or more
.I bootargs
arguments will be passed to boot/boot as explained in boot(8), with
the addition that the local method also supports local directories,
as well as fossil, kfs, iso9660 and bz2 files.
The files in the host file system can be accessed from inside 9vx through
.I #Z.
The
.I -r
option sets
.I nobootprompt=local!#Z/localroot
to boot from a local directory or file containing a Plan 9 tree.
By default nobootprompt is set to local!/boot/rootfs.bz2, this file
includes a very minimal system.
If an
.I user
is not specified, the current user in the host operating system will
be used.  The option
.I -e
can be used to boot a terminal and run
.I initcmd
instead of $home/lib/profile.
Other options are:
.nr xx \w'\fL-m\f2name\ \ '
.TP \n(xxu
.BI -f
Do not fork at init
.TP
.BI -g
Do not start the gui
.TP
.BI -i
If there is no root, boot from
.I rootfs.bz2
and run rc(1), else set
.I init=/386/init -tm
(see init(8))
.TP
.BI -t
Use tty for input/output
.TP
.BI -l " cpulimit"
Maximum cpu usage (in percentage)
.TP
.BI -m " memsize"
Memory size
.TP
.BI -n " [ tap ] device"
Create virtual ethernet devices. The
.I tap
option tells that
.I device
is a tap device. Else, the virtual device will use pcap(3) to intercept
packets going to
.I device,
and will therefore need root privileges. If the host
.I device
is not valid, pcap will use the first one available. More than one
virtual ethernet device can be used. In absence of virtual devices,
the network stack of the host system will be used.
.TP
.BI -a " macaddress"
Use the hardware address
.I macaddress
for the last given virtual network device.
.TP
.BI -z " zallowed"
Do not allow access to host files in #Z whose path does not begin with 
.I zallowed
(/ by default).
.SS 9vx.ini configuration files
Configuration parameters can also be given to
.I 9vx
in a configuration file specified with the
.I -p
command line option.
A file name
.L -
means the standard input.
A
.I 9vx.ini
file contains a list of
.I parameter=value
pairs in a similar fasion to plan9.ini(8). Additional options are
.I nofork,
.I nogui,
.I initrc,
.I usetty,
.I cpulimit,
.I memsize,
.I netdev,
.I macaddr
(that can also be part of a netdev line),
.I zallowed.
.I localroot.
.I initcmd,
and
.I service.
New lines can be escaped surrounding
.I value
by simple quotes.
.SS Exiting 9vx
Reboot signals terminate 9vx execution. In particular, the reboot command
will exit printing its arguments to starndard error.
.SS Running 9vx as a cpu server
To run 9vx as a cpu server is recommended to add a
cpurc file in /cfg/vx32/, see cpurc(8). An example is included
with 9vx. This file will be used if the
.I service
environment variable is set to
.I cpu
in the 9vx.ini file (or if the
.I -e cpurc
option is given in the command line).
.SH BUGS
The pcap ethernet device is not compiled by default (fails without
pcap.h). To compile it, set PLAN9PCAP to etherpcap in the Makefrag file
and recompile.
.P
The menu system of plan9.ini(8) is not supported in
.I 9vx.ini
files.
.P
.I 9vx
is not so stable as native Plan9 systems.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
Bryan Ford and Russ Cox,
``Vx32: Lightweight User-level Sandboxing on the x86'
